[Music]
hey everybody welcome to impact theory i
am here with benjamin hardy phd ben
welcome to the show man thanks tom happy
to be with you man awesome well your
book
personality is not permanent uh i am
obsessed with this concept and i think
the right place to start is
give me a definition of personality as
you see it and why you think that you
needed to make that statement that it's
not permanent
yeah personality as i see it is pretty
much quite surface level actually a lot
of people view it a lot more
fundamentally than i do but it's from my
perspective very surface level i think
the general definition in psychology
would be your consistent attitudes and
behaviors over time
so that's basically it it's how you
consistently show up in situations how
you respond to situations and from my
perspective there's an enormous amount
of factors that lead to how you show up
and so i felt like i wanted to write
this book because i come from a huge
background of change in my own life came
from a pretty rough background
and i've gone through a lot of
psychology got the phd and so i just
felt like typical conversations about
personality were pretty weak just i from
my perspective they're just generally a
fixed mindset personality tests all of
these things are are just kind of a weak
view of of what the construct is and so
i just felt like it was a really good
vehicle to explain how things like
trauma work how things like environment
work how things like identity work i
just felt like personality was a really
good tool to show people how change was
possible
so when when you talk about
the amount of time that goes into
writing a book and you think okay this
this is going to be something that is
certainly very important to this person
and obviously you think that it brings
value to the world what is it that
makes people feel trapped in their
identity why is it so easy for people to
grow up thinking that identity or
personality is this fixed thing
that solidifies
yeah i think a lot of it obviously is
your identity identity and personality
are two separate things identity in my
opinion is far more fundamental identity
is basically how you self-define and how
you self-describe it's basically just
who you see yourself as which drives
your behavior but your story about
yourself so if i were to ask you tom who
are you you'd start telling me a story
you'd you know tell me about your past
you'd give me a narrative and so you
your identity is
basically
how you see yourself and what's
interesting about identity is it
actually in a lot of ways comes from
your goal you know so for example you
building quests are you building impact
theory whatever your goal is that's a
big part of what drives your view of
your identity me going to school
becoming an author like whatever goal
you have for your future and a lot of
people aren't as thoughtful about that
that's the thing that ultimately drives
your identity
and then your identity drives your
behavior and over time that reflects
your personality so personality from my
perspective is the offshoot of identity
and identity comes from your view of
your own future so if i said it in a
different way let me know if this makes
sense so identity is the narrative that
you give yourself just like you said and
then personality is the way that that
manifests in behavior
yeah behavior and attitudes it's how you
show up so you know when you change your
identity when you change your script
when you change your story it and
obviously that would be based on a goal
you have a future that you're trying to
create then that's going to change your
behavior over time and if in a really
easy way to actually assess that in
people is just compare your your current
behavior with your former self's
behavior it's really easy if you just
look at a snapshot of yourself maybe
five ten years ago the things you were
pursuing the things you described
yourself as the people you were around
those are you know even the things you
value chances are a lot of that's
different from what you value right now
and what you're seeking and how you
would even see yourself
yeah one of the you talk very eloquently
about that in the book one of the things
that i found really profound in the book
is that your
personality is going to change whether
you want it to or not on a long enough
timeline just the the way that life
bumps you about and the way that we are
meaning making machines and that that
we're always assigning meaning to things
we're always telling ourselves a story
it's it's going to shape you in a
certain path and it seems to me that
sort of the core thesis of the book is
you can take control of that and if you
don't you're going to end up somewhere
random and if you do you can end up
where you want to end up
um
tell us a little bit about your
background hiding in the comment that
you just made that you started out in
sort of a rough way is is a pretty
robust story and i think that i want to
identify where you started so we can
talk a little bit about like things like
attachment style and and and ultimately
i want to understand how malleable you
think we are is it 100 were blank slates
or is there some contending with
um
you know even even recognizing that it's
nature and nurture but is there some
things that are sort of locked in in
early childhood
yeah i definitely don't think we're
blank slates i uh i also don't think
that potential is fixed just as an
example when you gain new knowledge or
new relationships or new attributes you
start from a new starting point than you
did before so your potent my potential
right now is different from my potential
five years ago because i have different
knowledge different characteristics i'm
in a new context the world's different
so if you're comparing yourself with
your former self and assuming that you
have the same situation and same
attributes you're actually making it a
false comparison it'd be like with my
foster kids
who we adopted saying that they had the
same innate potential in their former
environment as they do with me and my
wife they're actually two separate
contexts to separate abilities so that
view of people is not looking at them
from an atomic perspective where you're
seeing them just solely as an
independent attribute instead it's more
of a contextual relational ability you
know person so my view is that people do
have a lot of potential for change but
yeah there are constraints and we can
kind of go back and forth and figure out
what we both think about that
but yeah as far as my own story i
basically you know grew up
in a pretty healthy normal situation but
my parents had a just a really rough
divorce which can obviously be
kind of a pivot moment for a kid i'm the
oldest of three boys and ultimately it
was just a nasty
rough divorce that just didn't turn out
well for anyone and you know my father
ended up becoming a drug addict it just
created a huge amount of depression for
him
and it was weird because i was the
oldest i my dad invested the most in me
just being the oldest son he had done a
lot of homework with me went to my
baseball games like it was weird just
seeing a flip you know where it's like
not only do your parents get divorced
but all of a sudden like your father
goes down this deep dive and my house
literally became essentially like a
rough place like there were extreme drug
addicts there there was drugs all over
the place like it just became a really
weird place how old is his point
uh you know they got divorced at 11 and
then like you know it was probably from
like 12 on you know from like 12-18 and
it just got weird thinking at this point
i don't know man a lot of me was
blocking it out you know like i played a
lot of video games my friend you know i
would have friends over and we'd be just
in one room playing video games and like
weirder and weirder people would come
over and they'd just go behind a closed
door and it just it just got really
weird man um you know bright lights in
the room my dad changed his clothing
style like it was just really
interesting i kind of just blocked it i
did a lot of skateboarding growing up a
lot of video games and so me and my
friends would be there you know playing
video games
and uh it just it got really weird and
and i wasn't comfortable really even
having the conversations even though i
had a lot of friends who had weird
backgrounds as well
and
and uh it was when i was like 18 that i
finally really started opening up about
how i felt about it i had a girlfriend
and like she actually just gave me the
space to talk about it and i had huge
breakdowns and eventually it got to a
point where it was just too rough for me
and my younger brothers that we just
went and lived with my mom full time she
lived pretty close and so we were going
back and forth and i kind of just pushed
it out and i kind of pushed everyone out
emotionally through that and just kind
of self-preservation i will say and i do
obviously break it down a lot in the
book my dad's not the same guy i left
ultimately left on a church mission when
i was 20 years old left for a few years
and right before i left on that
experience i rekindled my relationship
with my dad and we went and had lunch
together
obviously a big aspect of trauma is how
you view your relationship with your
parents they may not be around but like
a lot of that that connection has an
impact deep down on who you are and so i
just wanted to fix that that was
something i felt like i should do before
i left and so we started having lunch
together and ultimately he began working
his way out of his addictions he ended
up even becoming like an addiction
recovery help and so he's now he's not
even the same guy remotely as he was
before he's very healthy um overcome his
addictions he's in a great spot i have a
great relationship with him and uh so
things are quite different than they
were like 10 15 years ago
okay there there's so much to unpack in
there um i want to go back to
the girlfriend she gives you a chance to
connect with somebody you define the
book and you're quoting somebody and i
forget unfortunately who you were
quoting what the exact quote was but the
gist was that it isn't the trauma that
messes you up it's what the meaning you
assign to something when you don't have
a sympathetic listener to like connect
with
what was it about one do you remember
the exact quotes is pretty powerful yeah
yeah the quote comes from dr peter
levine it's from his book healing it's
called waking the tiger healing trauma a
very good book so peter levine and the
quote is
trauma isn't what happens to you it's
what you hold inside in the absence of
an empathetic witness ah so good
so i'm assuming girlfriend becomes the
empathetic witness
yeah definitely she was someone i felt
comfortable enough asking me and she
knew that my life was so much more
messed up than i was putting on you know
this is like my senior year in high
school and uh
you know i you know as a high school kid
i was just trying to like save face you
know i just going to school you know
just pretending like my life was
completely normal and you know she knew
it was not and so she she just took the
time to like sit down and just ask me to
like unpack what the heck was going on
in my life and i just remember just
breaking down you know and just like you
know i felt safe enough to do that and
just totally broke down and just cried
and uh it was just interesting but i
mean that was a very helpful
conversation and then she ultimately was
able to just ask me you know
where do you want to go what do you want
to do you know and and it just it opened
me up
so in that moment what what is the
catharsis of letting it out is it
acknowledging what the meaning is is it
recognizing that you can assign new
meaning to it i mean the breakthrough
that you end up having it at whatever 20
years old that you you have all this
meaning around your dad you need to like
revisit that restructure that that's
pretty crazy i mean i get it sort of
post the phd but to be doing it at that
age i certainly was not capable of that
so i'm just curious like is there a tie
between the cathartic release
did you recognize at that point would
you have used the word meaning at that
point
no way no i didn't really i would not
have used the word meaning i do think
what i wanted from that conversation was
that i wanted to help my dad i think up
to that point i was mad at him you know
the meaning that i'd given to it even
though i wouldn't have used those words
is that i'd kind of given up on him you
know he used to be my hero and at that
point i just thought it's a lost cause
like my life sucks like i'm just gonna
move on from that and then i don't know
what that means for my future but i
think that conversation kind of cracked
the egg i guess a little bit and just
opened me up that you know i actually
want to fix my life a little bit and i'm
the oldest not really know how to do
that but part of that is redeveloping a
relationship with my dad seeing if
there's anything i can do and obviously
that's what he had wanted he had tried
on multiple occasions i remember him
coming to my mom's apartment knocking on
the door and just saying will you guys
talk to me and we just like shut him out
we're just like go away like you're not
in our life anymore and he had tried
that so many times and and so you know
i think that that just led me to
wanting to fix things a little bit or
wanting to do what i could maybe me
becoming a little bit more compassionate
towards his situation
i i don't know all the full breakdown in
the full psychology of it of my 18 year
old self but i knew that at that point i
started to make wanting to make change
and so when
you decide you want to make change in
your life i assume you quickly identify
that there's something in the
relationship with dad that needs to be
addressed now looking back on it with
the sort of psychological understanding
of trauma how trauma shapes us how you
talk about the book how we can actually
quote unquote change our past which is
one of the more fascinating concepts in
the book
so looking back now with your knowledge
and understanding now
what were you doing there that ended up
being healing and was it healing for
just you did it help your dad yeah it
definitely helped my dad i mean he was
you know in large part defined by his
failure as a father you know and so he
had he was he was down in the dumps you
know and so the fact that i was reaching
out to him asking for his advice you
know just the fact that i was reaching
out to him i think gave him more impetus
to like really rethink his life start
getting help and so it was huge for him
and also i was genuinely like you know
seeking his advice i was trying to make
life decisions thinking about what i
should do and where i should go and he
was you know ultimately giving me advice
and as a father i think that's what he
wanted to do was he wanted to like weigh
in on my future and stuff like that so
it was
you know it was big but i think a big
part of it was is that
where i was at and i think that this has
a lot to do with trauma and also
identity as i had kind of given up on my
future i think that trauma is pretty
misunderstood most people think that
trauma is just so focused on the past in
my opinion it's what actually trauma
does to your future because from my
perspective your view of your own future
is the greatest determinant in who you
are you know your view of your future is
what impacts you but a lot of the
research on trauma shows that it
shatters your imagination towards your
future and your hope in that future and
so
and that's the you know the crucial
thing and so when i began kind of moving
forward i began to rethink my future and
start to actually commit back to the
idea that i could have a future and so
that's what ultimately led me to having
those types of conversations and even
being willing to go through that
awkwardness or going to that change
process is because i now saw a future
that i actually was like
i want this i believe that i can
actually be something more and so that
led to ultimately more positive
behaviors
so trauma is an idea that runs um pretty
effectively through the book you deal
with what i consider one of the most
like if you were to say hey design the
perfect
event to destroy an adult human being i
would say the death of your child that
you blame yourself for
and in the book you give one such case
dude it it like really was a gut punch
for me just as a guy reading it i can
only imagine
um so talk to me about trauma and how
we
integrate it i don't remember you using
that word in the book um but like what
do you do with trauma like how do people
really move beyond that
yeah yeah yeah
yeah so that story is crazy uh the story
of melissa hull she's someone who my mom
introduced me to she's just an amazing
woman uh her son died under her care you
know she was supposed to be watching her
son and he was out playing and fell into
a canal and died and ultimately she
blamed herself for that for years and it
was through an empathetic witness that
she was able to begin to
you know reassign the meaning ultimately
she had gotten all sorts of condolence
letters
and well you know someone had told her
that something similar would happen you
know she got all sorts of letters and
the night before she was the night she
was going to kill herself
you know she read this letter she had a
stack of condolence letters and she read
this one from a lady who had a similar
situation you know this lady i think
named teresa who she never actually was
able to get back in contact with but
tried many times
this lady named teresa who wrote her
letter she was with her six-year-old
daughter went inside for a little bit to
like grab the phone or something came
back out and her daughter had gotten hit
by a car and died during the two minutes
she was inside and so what what teresa
had sent to melissa in the letter
was that look like you're not a bad
parent like you didn't try to make this
happen this
was a freak accident teresa was able to
say some things in that letter that
helped melissa to actually like have
hope again and it really was that
breakdown similar to i think what i had
where it was just like
i think you blame yourself a lot for
something or you just lose hope in
something that you initially wanted and
so that leads you to just kind of losing
hope and i think what you need is some
form of like a shred of hope and i think
that that's what she got
and so i think that
you know she was kind of giving up on
herself i i was kind of giving up on
myself
but i think you kind of have to
i mean in the case of her and even me a
lot of it was just that an external
party came and just like
actually like saved space or just tried
something um but i think for someone who
more practically is in a dark place and
just wants to get out i think actually
seeking help um it could be a friend it
could be a therapist it could be
an old high school coach uh it could be
an old church leader whatever it is i
think if you just go up and just talk to
someone and just literally open up and
just be flat out honest i think that in
general complete honesty and
transparency there's a concept in
alcoholics anonymous that you're as sick
as your secrets that has a lot to do
with trauma it's just burying things
holding things in and so i think
from like a human growth perspective the
moment you just begin opening up about
where you're at how you're feeling
it's kind of like writing things in a
journal once you have it out you can
actually start to look at it from a
different perspective and then you can
start reshaping the meaning of it and
maybe you can even get the help of smart
people to help you start rethinking it
and maybe looking at it from a more of a
hopeful perspective that you're not a
bad person you're not a loser
these are crazy things that happen but
you can do something different about it
you can look at it differently and
ultimately your life still has purpose
and meaning and you can still do
something with it
all right so i would say be aggressive
about be aggressive about seeking that
you know yeah i think that is sage
advice my friend and um
all too often people are trying to
handle it sort of casually instead of
like you said being aggressive going and
getting sort of
structured help somebody that is trained
to provide that help i want to talk
about the
hope and reframing so you talked about
giving up on yourself when you say
giving up on yourself do you mean
that you have lost the ability to
believe that you can change or that that
your situation will be different
i think giving up on myself just meant
giving up on the idea that i could have
the life i wanted you know i'd given up
on my future essentially it wasn't so
much i didn't even really think about my
idea that i could change like that
wasn't really how i was thinking about i
was just i had just given up on my idea
that my future was going to be any good
or that maybe my hopes or expectations
were possible i just kind of assigned my
future as i don't really know what's
going to happen anymore but it's going
to suck like you know so i think it's
just giving up on your idea of the
future it's not so much
you know and if you've given up on your
idea of the future you probably don't
think you can change as a person you
know because your view of your future i
think determines how much you believe
you can change and so i think it's
mostly just giving up on your idea of
the future
all right so then i think we have to
address now the concept in the book
about your past does not define your
future which i would say most people
feel pretty comfortable with the idea
that your past does define your future
or certainly is the best indicator of
your future
why is that not true and does that tie
into this notion of being able to
reframe your past
oh absolutely yeah i would say the past
doesn't define the future for two
reasons one is because the past from
your perspective at least from a
psychology perspective is just a meaning
memory is always changing it's always
flexible and so the version of your past
that you have right now is probably
different from the version of the past
you had three or four years ago even
thinking about the same events and so
the past is is really just a story it's
just a meaning yeah there were objective
events that occurred but you have no
ability to actually know what those
objective events were because we as a
you know from a psychology perspective
is all we can see is through our
perspective uh is all we can see is
through our subjective lens and so
when you
look you know anytime you learn
something new you read a book you have a
new experience that probably informs
your view of everything else it's like
you change a part you change the whole
and so kind of breaking memory down in a
really simple way your memory is always
constructed in the present you know who
i am right now i think about my myself
as an 11 year old boy with my parents
getting divorced and my father becoming
a drug addict my view of that and the
meaning i assigned to it and even all of
the context around those memories uh is
completely painted by where i'm at right
now as a person the fact that i have a
great relationship with my dad the fact
that i have all this knowledge in
psychology i've got five kids like all
of that reshapes how i look at and
interpret my past one challenge that
people have is they're not actively
approaching their past as a flexible
entity and so they they tend to kind of
relay the same story over and over which
doesn't necessarily help
but so one reason why the past is
flexible is because it's simply just a
meaning it's a story and your memory is
always changing anyways and your memory
is always constructed in the present so
brent's life he's one of my favorite
psychologists he wrote a book called
time and psychological explanation
freaking deep dive you would actually
love it because i know you like diving
deep into like thick stuff but he
basically says that you know
a lot of people think that the past is
causing the present but the reality from
a memory perspective is that the present
is causing the meaning of the past
wherever you're at in the present that's
what's determining how you view your
past and so if you learn if you grow if
you you know have achievements if you
just develop healthy relationships it
will alter the meaning and the view you
have towards your past and that's
something you should seek in my opinion
if you're if you're still viewing the
past and former relationships and former
experiences the same way you did four or
five years ago that says more about who
you are right now than it says about
your past it says that you're not
learning you're not gaining perspective
you're not seeking greater context
you're not asking hard questions and so
for me as an example i had to go and ask
my dad dad tell me all about your
perspective of when you were a drug
addict and when me and my brothers left
you like tell me what that was like tell
me why you went and had those
experiences tell me why you had made
those decisions um tell me what it felt
like coming to mom's house and that's
slamming the door on your face like i
that's seeking greater context and
perspective and obviously the more
context you have towards someone you
have greater empathy and compassion and
so in hearing his story i'm like i can
kind of see what i obviously wouldn't
justify him doing it but i can see to
some reason why he did that
um so that's that's one reason why the
past is flexible and we can obviously go
into the mechanics of how to do that but
the second reason is because the past
isn't what ultimately drives you it is
it is your future and that's really
where the psychology is going that's
what your vision of the future
your yeah your your view of whatever
future you want and your commitment to
that future so
roy baumeister marty seligman um i
actually have the book right here
um this is a brand new textbook that
just came out by roy baumeister marty
seligman etc
and uh you know these are some of the
most prominent psychologists of the last
50 years this book's called homo
prospectus and it's based on a concept
called prospection and they're kind of
throwing a wrench into all of the
research of the last hundred years and
saying you know what maybe it's not the
past maybe it's not the past that's
driving you maybe it's your view of your
own future and maybe the thing that
makes us conscious human beings is the
fact that we have the ability to imagine
an infinite amount of futures from roy
baumeister's perspective it's actually
what makes us conscious is that we can
imagine multiple futures and then
ultimately dictate our present behavior
towards one of those futures that's what
makes us conscious beings is that we can
choose a future and commit to it in the
present
and so another reason in my opinion why
the past doesn't drive the present
or the future because in my opinion now
it's actually that the future future's
the thing driving the president more
than anything else
all right that's really interesting and
i think going into the mechanics would
be really helpful so i've just talked to
so many people that feel defined by
their past so i'll let you tell me are
we better off starting with how to
reframe the past are we better off
starting with how to reframe the future
i think that ultimately you've got to do
both and i think that you've got to do
both at multiple stages
and so you know as for someone like
myself who's just on a growth trajectory
seeking growth i kind of am just doing
both together um
probably
probably going to the past might be a
good place to start for people you know
in the beginning and honestly it's a
good place to start at any time one
thing you talk about in the book was a
story of a woman who had had a difficult
past and as part of
reconciling with that or integrating it
reframing it whatever the right word is
was she would revisit this difficult
time in moods of sort of jubilation so
if things were going well and she felt
confident and you know let's say she was
around friends and she felt secure and
understood she would then retell that
story revisit that and i thought there
was something really interesting about
using the neurochemistry that you're in
to repaint the emotional feeling that
you have in the past and you know from
what i know about memory and you
probably know a lot more but your you
reach in you pull it out you have it in
working memory now you can think about
it talk about it recant it and in that
moment you're also
re-contextualizing it which is one of
the reasons i think mdma therapy works
for people with intractable depression
is you're revisiting something in this
like neurochemistry of like everything
is love and you feel good about
everything and you feel compassionate
toward yourself and maybe the
perpetrator you know that put you in
that situation and then when you put
that memory back
it now has that new patina of that
feeling on it
yeah that story was actually my wife
oh really
yeah my wife had been in a very abusive
marriage before we got married and um
yeah she ultimately you know learned
that that you you know you shouldn't
talk about your trauma unless you fully
overcome it in a bad state you know you
want to be in a peaceful place but yeah
there's a lot of research as well behind
the idea that you know so there's like
the whole idea of beta state alpha state
stuff like that like an alpha state's
more of a peaceful
creative state whereas beta is like the
stress state you're in and usually a
trauma is created in a stress state
where like the i guess you could say the
emotion that that's tagged to the memory
is stressful and so whenever you think
of that memory all of a sudden you
recreate a stress state in your body
right now and so yeah i think a part of
that's when you're in a more of a
peaceful environment or having a good
experience and you're in a safe spot
where you can feel like you can talk
about that then you can integrate
aspects of your current context into
your former memory which is like you
know you've got now the new people you
know if you're in a great environment
you're talking to people they they then
become an aspect of that memory because
now you've talked to it through them
you've now ultimately reassigned the
meaning and now you've kind of re-tagged
the emotion to it as maybe more of an
alpha of a peaceful
emotion
yeah that that to me is super
interesting and just the concept of
taking control of this whole process so
okay we we now are beginning to
understand how we go back and
re-contextualize the past now how do we
begin to allow ourselves to
you know begin to think about a
beautiful future you know thinking about
um
melissa whose uh son drown
i i have to imagine there's some part of
her that's like you don't deserve to be
happy and so how do we begin to break
out of that and build this vision for
the future
yeah well in her case she had a big
reason to commit to her future so she
actually that night the night that she
almost died the night that she read the
letter
she had another son who was younger and
she ultimately created a purpose for
herself you know victor franklin man
search for meaning he talks a lot about
how it's not necessarily your conditions
but it's it's your view of your future
and a sense of purpose that determines
your happiness or your ability in the
present and so for her she she
ultimately created a sense of purpose
for herself in the moment she wrote
herself a letter where she wrote her son
a letter her two-year-old son a letter
for 10 years into the future and she
just poured her heart out in that letter
which i think is probably cathartic and
very inspiring but she just said look
you know your brother devin died i'm
really sorry that this happened i'm
sorry you have to grow up without a
brother
but i'm freaking committed to being the
best mother i can for you and in 10
years from now i'm going to present you
this letter and i promise you i'm going
to fulfill this promise and that in 10
years from now when we're talking you
know when you're 12 and you can
comprehend this a little bit better i
will have fulfilled that promise and and
i want to just thank you for giving my
life purpose thank you for giving me a
reason for showing up and so i think
that
you know for her
she made a pretty powerful pronouncement
towards her future self and towards her
son and she ultimately assigned a deep
level of meaning and then made a promise
to herself and to her son and then she
fulfilled on that promise and so
that's what she did i'm sure that she
had plenty of ups and downs along the
way but she she committed to a future
self you know and to her son and she had
a deep reason for doing it and so i
think that that's what started her
towards moving
forward
so how do people
pick a future that is exciting that is
going to be something that is i mean if
if the homo prospectus is right and the
very thing that drives us defines us is
that vision for the future how do people
begin to craft a vision that is wise in
the sense that it will create the
present that they can actually enjoy
yeah so there's a quote from dan
sullivan one of my good buddies and he
says that the only way to make your
present better is by making your future
bigger which is essentially a statement
of perspective but i think that one
thing that's really important to realize
is that your view of your own future is
determined by your current level of
awareness and understanding you know
like what what futures i imagine are
different from the futures i would have
imagined three or four years ago because
i know i'm a different person i see the
world differently i've had a lot of
experiences i've got knowledge i didn't
have them in a context and so my view
even to imagine or come up with various
future scenarios is fundamentally
different than my former self and my
future self will be in the same boat my
future self will imagine different
futures than my current self has because
my future self has had experiences and
knowledge and awareness that i just
don't have um but i think you know based
on where you're currently at as a person
what do you value most you know what is
a future worth having what are things
that you value that would ultimately be
worth spending your time on
a big aspect of that is just thinking
about your future identity your future
self i think that that's generally the
place to start is who do you want to be
what do you want your circumstances to
be what do you want to be doing what do
you value like where do you want to be
in the future i think just imagining
where you want to be who you want to be
and what you want to be doing that's
hopefully valuable
that's worth working towards or worth
creating i think that that's the first
step is ultimately thinking about your
future self the person you want to be
the situation you want to have and
ultimately what you want to be doing
that you can't do at this present moment
for one reason or another
and so
i know you talk a lot about journaling
in the book journaling is something
that's been transformational for me
is that one of the sort of mechanistic
things you recommend that people do and
i know you have prompts that you
use yourself is there jordan peterson
talks about the whole notion of future
authoring you know writing that script
out do you have guidance for people that
are embarking on that
i think that journaling is a really
great place to start i don't necessarily
have like an extreme you know like
structure i mostly just write about what
i want but i think thinking about
different time horizons is good like um
i look at you know obviously different
layers of my future self you know like i
have a future self in my 80s that's
obviously influencing what i do right
now leading me to certain decisions and
thoughts but also like where do i want
to be in three to five years and so i
think thinking about what's your next
step like if you're what's the thing you
want most right now so like if you're
someone who's single that really wants
to be married like well what you know
what is the ultimate thing you want
right now that would reflect your
futures at a much higher level than
you're at right now so like for me as an
example when i was in undergrad and i
was studying psychology like my next
level future self was me as a phd
student really diving into psychology
once i got there like i really really
want to be a professional author and so
like i think from a more practical
standpoint like
what is the next level future self that
like really excites you you know like
what's you know it could be getting
married or could be starting that
business or having your business be
successful or could be getting that book
deal um could be being an elite ship so
that you're doing like those iron mans
whatever it is you want like what is
that next version of you that's the
thing that you really really want and
then ultimately you can create a process
to getting to there
but i think just thinking about what's
you at that next step which is obviously
maybe a quantum leap or a next level up
of your current self and what you really
want all right let's talk about the gap
and the growth the focus on one or the
other because when i think about
somebody trying to put them through
themselves through this journey people
are going to run into well i don't
believe that about myself and you made a
comment really early about your foster
kids that you've now adopted and that
what was fundamentally possible for them
when you know they were in a bad
situation is very different than what's
possible for them now
which is really interesting but how do
you get people to be when they're in the
bad situation how do you get them to
believe that no no as you go what you're
capable of will continue to grow and
expand and every time you add a new
piece of information a new bit of
knowledge new bit of confidence then
like what's capable next gets bigger and
bigger and bigger and bigger but in that
beginning phase how do they allow
themselves to build a future that
they're excited about is it just like
baby steps along the way or do we really
aim big and just buy into the process
what does that look like yeah super
super interesting question uh so just
for like the theory behind it the
concept is called the self-expansion
model um there's a lot of cool research
on the self-expansion model but
basically the ideas is that as human
beings
we don't have innate
potential or innate efficacy our
efficacy which is basically our
confidence or our ability to produce
results is not innate but it's
contextual and it's based on the
resources you have towards your goals so
as an example like my foster kids when
they were in a situation not only did
they not imagine
probably i mean they imagined futures it
was probably them sitting and watching
tv you know what i mean because that's
all they did but they also didn't have
very many resources to dictate towards
any goals and so when you
create a new environment or when you
even read a new book and get new
knowledge or when you have a new
relationship you now have new resources
to put towards your goals and so that's
how you expand as a person is by being
able to imagine bigger futures and then
having the resources to put towards
those but you know to answer your
question as far as like
you know if someone's in a rough
situation and how do they even get
themselves out
i do like the gap in the game um
perspective that you provided i you know
i'm just quoting your book that yeah i
don't want any credit for this this is
your your magic i love the concept and
so i'll tell the truth i stole that idea
as well from dan sullivan dan sullivan
is the you know he's the coach who you
know has all these really cool ideas
that i learned but the gap in the game
is basically an idea that if you're
always measuring yourself against your
ideal you're always going to feel this
gap between you and where you know
whatever your ideal is and that's going
to make you feel unhappy whereas if you
measure yourself against your former
self where you were before you'll see
progress you know there's a quote from
ernest hemingway and ernest hemingway
the author of the novelist said that
nobility is not about being superior to
your fellow man true nobility is about
being superior to your former self so as
an example i have some really good
friends of mine
they're in like their 40s they've got
you know some kids and stuff and they've
had serious financial issues during
kovid where he's like lost his job she's
gone through like this identity crisis
and they're kind of freaked out because
they've got kids and they're like what
the heck do we do
and i just asked them
you know look at where you were like
three or four months ago like have you
made any progress in the last four
months towards getting yourself into a
better financial situation is your
relationship with each other better like
where are you at versus your where you
were four months ago and they're like oh
yeah we're in a much better situation
you know like we've made big progress
and that's that's reflecting on the gain
of where you were versus where you're at
right now and that gives you a little
sense of confidence and movement you
know so i think that that's a i think
it's a good practice wherever you're at
whether you've made big success or
whether you're small is to actually like
look at the progress that you've
actually made and i think that that
really helps you to feel like it
actually increases your hope so it's
it's looking at the good focusing on the
good and saying
what can you do now because of that
yeah that concept i think it's really
important for people to understand that
you know look it it's probably pretty
difficult when you're in real dire
straits to believe just how big your
future can be that you could be capable
of those things but that notion that
like getting better expands how far you
can go expands how far you can go
expands how far you can go
and that to me is pretty intriguing now
one thing that i find interesting to you
and the only time you mention it in the
book anyway is almost a disparaging
remark but i i think that this may tie
into
um some of what has made you so
successful which is that used to
skateboard
now i don't know if you took it very
seriously but as somebody who dabbled in
skateboarding and did not take it very
seriously because i was so afraid of
pain which is something that you will
absolutely have to deal with when you're
skateboarding
is that ability to believe in your
future that you can get better that just
because doing the trick now you know
hurts and the skateboard is whacking you
in the shin or you're rolling your ankle
or you know you're tagging yourself in
even more delicate places
skateboarders have to have this this
willingness to suffer through that pain
to get to something great and i wonder
one was that how you approach
skateboarding and then two what lessons
can we learn about pushing through
adversity to get where we really want
because imagining a wonderful future is
not the same as having the tenacity to
execute against it
yeah i i love the question i loved
skateboarding still uh the reason i like
skateboarding is one is you you can
imagine it you can also see it you know
you create a skate park you can model
you can you know obviously that's a big
aspect of
psychology is what we call selective
attention so like whatever you're
focusing on intensely like that's what
you're kind of becoming as he's and so
you can watch really good skateboarders
um as far as like the dealing with pain
and the pain tolerance
i think that i had developed an extreme
level of that through
all that i'd gone through with my family
and so like skateboarding didn't seem
that risky because like my home
situation was obviously very risky
how i would frame that now is rather
than like
being able to deal with pain which
obviously you deal with a lot of that in
skateboarding or snowboarding or
anything
is
i now view it more from like an
emotional flexibility or psychological
flexibility standpoint so like mo the
physical pain of of learning is not as
intense usually as like the
psychological pain of letting go of
former beliefs or you know actually like
going through a growth process so like
there's a lot of research on deliberate
practice you know deliberate practice
and the idea of first off you have to
have a view of your future self but then
second off you have to go through the
process of learning which can be quite
difficult
and
in my opinion that process is mostly
about emotional flexibility or what
psychological psychological flexibility
which is trying things that you've never
done before outside your comfort zone um
failing and getting more and more
comfortable with uncertainty getting you
know so if you're trying a new trick as
an example on a skateboard you know
you've never kicked flipped off like a
five stare there's some like you know
what i mean no i have not
yeah but you're trying something new and
so like part of facing that emotional
resistance is like yeah i've never done
this before
and kind of sitting with the emotions
you know what i mean and and then
becoming more and more comfortable
outside of situations of certainty you
know i think that it's so fascinating to
learn obviously about the brain and
about how the brain is ultimately a
prediction machine and that the reason
we formulate memories is just so that we
can actively predict our future and the
brain goes into kind of crazy mode
whenever you're in a situation where you
can't actively predict your future so if
you're trying something new on a
skateboard you've never done it before
you know you're going to get all sorts
of emotional
floods of like you know what if you know
then you're going to obviously go into
the state where you're like amplifying
the potential
failure you know like you know it's that
whole loss of version thing where we
amplify the potential downsides of what
could happen with the potential
consequences by like five to five times
and so i think it's just learning to
handle that learning to realize that
it's not gonna all fall apart and and
ultimately becoming comfortable with the
uncertainty of the outcome you know if i
try this trick
you know i don't know what's gonna
happen but i'll be okay
and so i think it's mostly about it's i
mean i think pain tolerance is good but
i think mostly it's about becoming
flexible to uncertainty flexible to your
emotions and ultimately watching
yourself do things that you've never
done before over and over again and
that's how you build confidence that's
how you build that identity capital is
becoming okay with i don't know what's
going to happen here but i'm going to
try it anyways and and it probably won't
be as bad as i think it's going to be
talk to me more about that idea of
flexibility it's something you go into
great detail in the book i found that in
in health and fitness you talk a lot
about metabolic flexibility that's this
big thing about being able to you know
either
burn sugar or burn fat and the ability
to fast effectively
is a really important idea and when we
get into cognitive or psychological
flexibility what what is that and how do
we cultivate it
yeah ton of research on it nowadays it's
based on a form of therapy called
acceptance and commitment therapy or act
but really what it is is it's it's your
ability to process your emotions to
handle them to reframe them and it's
ultimately about committing to a certain
goal and then just
becoming more and more comfortable with
ambiguity or uncertainty it's about you
ultimately actively moving through your
emotions rather than being stopped by
them towards a goal can you define
commitment as you talk about in the book
i think it will re-contextualize what
you're saying right now for people
because it carries a lot of weight in
the book
yeah commitment you know goal commitment
is just whatever you you know it's
committing to an outcome you know so as
human beings
you know and especially for me as an
author like i hear a lot of people who
say you should ignore the outcome and
just focus on the process but like from
a psychological standpoint that's that's
really bad for motivation and it's just
not how humans work you know so like
there's a concept in philosophy that i
love called teleology and teleology is
basically based on the idea that every
action we do as a human being
is to produce an outcome you know like
everything we do is goal driven me going
to the bathroom is to create an outcome
you know me going to the grocery store
to create an outcome me going home to be
with my kids to create an outcome and so
the more you just own the outcomes that
you want and commit to whatever outcome
you want
then
then you're
first off it's really good for your
identity because then you can actually
say this is who i am this is what i want
without pretending like you want
something else it actually creates
transparency
um but commitment also just you know
what i like and this comes from the book
the 15 commitments of conscious
leadership but commitment is basically
whatever results you're getting right
now you know like i just i think that
that's pretty freaking humbling you know
like whatever your circumstances are
that's what you're committed to
and if you really want something
different
then you're going to actually have to
fundamentally change what you're doing
and who you are to have that um and so i
i think commitment is kind of the
jumping point from courage you know
however committed you are to something
that's how courageous you could be and
however courageous you can be that's
what ultimately leads you to developing
flexibility developing competencies
trying things you've never done and
that's how confidence is built and so i
think commitment to a specific outcome
is the starting point
i've heard you use
a story to illustrate the difference
between wanting something and being
committed to it and it was the guy that
gets stuck in the snow
um and i i would love to have you tell
that story and especially in the context
of your own life with in a single
12-month period going from zero children
to five children uh which is a pretty
extraordinary leap um
yeah if you can walk us through that i
think it illustrates what you're talking
about with commitment and and how it can
affect your ability to get to an outcome
yeah yeah so this is a really
interesting story i'd heard from like
the like he was a
an organizational behavioral professor
named david bednar and basically he told
the story of a young man who bought a
pickup truck and he wanted to prove to
his wife you know that it was a worthy
investment so he went up and he was
going to go up to the mountains and
ultimately get you know get firewood to
bring back and they were gonna have an
amazing fire and stuff like that he was
up in the mountains it was really snowy
he got stuck in the snow was trying to
peel out and stuff like that ultimately
was stuck in the situation and was just
gonna sit there and wait
for someone to come by and pull him out
essentially and
people weren't coming so he got out and
he just ultimately started cutting
firewood threw it onto the back of the
truck
and hours went by the truck was
completely filled with firewood it was
getting dark getting cold i think that
this story occurred like in the 70s and
so this was like before cell phones and
stuff like that and so he was just out
there in the mountains it was getting
dark
and so he got in his car turned it on
and tried to pull out and to his utter
surprise because of the weight of the
wood he was able to get traction and
pull himself out and and so bednar's
explanation is is that he needed that
load he needed the weight to ultimately
give him the traction to move forward
without that weight he didn't have
traction he was spinning out and so i've
kind of used that
analogy for myself like
basically when i got home from like that
mission experience that was in 2010 you
know i was 22 years old i at that point
had already decided in my mind that i
wanted to be a writer but i didn't
actually know what that meant
and so
you know five years went by a lot of
time went by and i didn't really take
that much action on my future self um
and one once we became foster parents
when i was at clemson doing my phd all
of a sudden i felt this huge weight of
responsibility on me like now all of a
sudden we had these three kids and i
knew that my time was going to zip by
and so all of a sudden i felt this
extreme pressure in a good way you know
it's that whole pressure can either make
a diamond or bust a pipe but i felt this
extreme pressure that i needed to get
moving because time was going to zip by
and i also felt the pressure of like i
need to
now like
provide for these kids and i was a
graduate student making literally 13 000
a year like as a research assistant
making no money and frustrated and i'm
like i got to get moving and i think
there's a lot of really good ideas
behind this like will durant he's got
one of my favorite quotes he said that
the ability of the average person could
be doubled if their situation demanded
it um you know and there's a lot of like
philosophy behind the idea that it's not
really
um it's it's demand that creates like
resources you know so i felt demanded to
do it and so i just freaking stepped up
and moved forward and actually in
psychology they call that the pygmalion
effect just that you're either rising or
falling to the demands of your situation
and so i just i felt that pressure and i
want that you know i actually seek to
put that pressure on myself as a forcing
function i put i put myself in
situations where i feel like i have to
rise up it purges it kind of purges out
my loss of ambition or it purges out my
own
my own failings the situation requires
and so i think that that's what happened
for me when i when i had the foster kids
yeah i love that and so now i've
actually not heard of acceptance and
commitment therapy but now that we've
got that framework around the intensity
with which you mean commit
what is acceptance and commitment
therapy
yeah and sadly i'm not like the world's
expert on that but really it's about
committing to a goal and then just
accepting the emotions that you
experience along the way accepting the
failures along the way accepting that
there will be you know ups and downs and
ultimately moving forward despite that
getting the help you need despite that
reframing despite that like rather than
just feeling the pain and being shut
down by it you're committed to the
outcome and you accept that you're gonna
face a lot of crap through that and that
you can get through it and i think that
that's how you become flexible and so to
me that's why i think commitment is a
statement of what is whatever you're
commit committed to
that's what you get and so if you commit
to a certain future and you just accept
along the way that you're gonna have a
lot of ups and downs emotions
then you can move through it and you can
get the help you need to get through it
and that's how you ultimately become
flexible as a person
word
dude this was amazing tell people where
they can find you where they can get
your book
yeah get the book anywhere you want it's
called personality isn't permanent it's
right here um
and
yeah benjamin hardy's my benjamin
hardy.com is my website and uh just
really grateful to be with you tom
awesome dude thank you so much for
coming on i think that the topics that
you cover in the book are
extraordinarily important for anybody
that wants to love their life and
achieve something that you know they'll
be excited by so thank you so much for
writing it and uh i highly encourage all
of you guys to read the book to go to
his website to just look at these ideas
i think they are absolutely
life-changing and speaking of
life-changing if you haven't already be
sure to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care
i live by two core principles right the
first is that everything everyone knows
they learned
and i don't accept that i'm less
intelligent than the next person which
means i can learn it too right
the second is that every single excuse i
have is valid
but that's still not going to give me
the results that i want